Week 1: Introduction to Cognitive Psychology
1

    Question 1: The school of psychology known as functionalism, which emphasized the purposes of the mind’s operations, was founded by:
        Wilhelm Wundt
        John Watson
        William James (Correct)
        Edward Titchener
    Question 2: The fact that you know you have seen the face before but cannot remember the name of the person, illustrates the cognitive process of:
        perception
        attention
        recognition (Correct)
        recall
    Question 3: The term _________ refers to the relevance of the research to the “real world.”
        Internal validity
        Evolutionary validity
        Ecological validity (Correct)
        Neural validity
    Question 4: _______________ challenged the assumption that mental events were beyond the realm of scientific study.
        Cognitive revolution (Correct)
        Behaviorist rebellion
        Human factor movements
        Universal grammar
    Question 5: Since the 1970s, various techniques of _________ have allowed us to construct pictures of the anatomy and functioning of intact brains.
        Genetic engineering
        Brain Imaging (Correct)
        Neurosurgery
        Brain lesioning
    Question 6: Historians date the founding of scientific psychology to the 1879 laboratory of:
        William James
        Wilhelm Wundt (Correct)
        John Locke
        Edward Titchener
    Question 7: The term “limited capacity processors” suggests that:
        Humans have limited memory storage
        Human beings can only do so many things at once (Correct)
        Neurons can only fire at a certain rate
        Processing in the brain occurs in parallel
    Question 8: This psychologist sought to describe the intellectual structures underlying cognitive experience at different developmental points through an approach he called genetic epistemology:
        Galton
        Skinner
        Wundt
        Piaget (Correct)
    Question 9: Clinical interviews are to introspection as ______ are to __________.
        Naturalistic observations; experiments
        Naturalistic observations; quasi experiments
        Controlled observations; naturalistic observations (Correct)
        Controlled observations; experiments
    Question 10: Which of the following is a basic assumption of the connectionist approach?
        Serial processing
        Multiple stores where information is kept throughout processing
        Networks of connections among simple processing units (Correct)
        A central processor that directs the flow of information

Week 2: Perception
2

    Question 1: A toy on the table represents
        A. Distal stimulus (Correct)
        B. Proximal stimulus
        C. Retinal image
        D. Percept
    Question 2: A patient with prosopagnosia has difficulty recognizing:
        A. Drawing of objects.
        B. Moving objects.
        C. Faces. (Correct)
        D. Sounds.
    Question 3: When you let go of a balloon and it floats away from you into the sky, the size of the retinal image gets smaller and smaller. However, you do not perceive the balloon as shrinking. This is an example of:
        A. Pattern recognition.
        B. Bottom-up processing.
        C. Size constancy. (Correct)
        D. Figure-ground organization.
    Question 4: The meaningful interpretation of a proximal stimulus is called the:
        A. Percept. (Correct)
        B. Sensation.
        C. Distal stimulus.
        D. Retinal Image
    Question 5: The two best studied forms of perception are:
        A. Visual and Haptic
        B. Visual and Olfactory
        C. Visual and Auditory (Correct)
        D. Auditory and Olfactory
    Question 6: Which of the following represents a good example of a proximal stimulus?
        A. A book on a shelf.
        B. A tree in your yard.
        C. A building on the horizon.
        D. The retinal image formed by a tree. (Correct)
    Question 7: According to Gibson’s theory, the acts or behaviors permitted by objects, places, and events are called:
        A. Consequences
        B. Functions
        C. Affordances (Correct)
        D. Direct processes
    Question 8: A stencil provides a good analogy for the theory of:
        A. Prototype matching.
        B. Template matching. (Correct)
        C. Good continuation.
        D. Featural analysis.
    Question 9: ___________ are to visual perception what phonemes are to language, according to Biederman.
        A. Receptors
        B. Retinas
        C. Distal stimuli
        D. Geons (Correct)
    Question 10: The principle governing reversible figures is:
        A. Figure-ground organization (Correct)
        B. Size constancy
        C. Dimensionality
        D. Retinal imagery

Week 3: Attention
3

    Question 1: According to Attenuation theory of Treisman, people tend to process:
        Only to the level of physical characteristics
        Only to the level of linguistic characteristics, separating it into words
        At a semantic level, analysing for meaning most of the time
        Only as much as is necessary to separate the attended from the unattended message (Correct)
    Question 2: The “cocktail party effect” refers to the fact that shadowing performance is disrupted when _______ is embedded in the unattended message.
        Backward speech
        The listener’s name (Correct)
        A section of repeated words
        Music
    Question 3: In Kahneman’s model of attention, allocation of mental resources is affected by preferences for certain kinds of tasks over others. These preferences are known as:
        Enduring dispositions (Correct)
        Arousal states
        Late selected preferences
        Momentary intentions
    Question 4: The word “cat” is ______ by the phrase “The dog chased the….”
        filtered
        attenuated
        primed (Correct)
        suggested
    Question 5: When listening to a conversation, your attention is momentarily diverted when you hear your name spoken in a different conversation across the room. This is an example of the:
        filter effect
        dichotic listening phenomenon
        cocktail party effect (Correct)
        attenuation effect
    Question 6: Which of the following would NOT be a reasonable basis for filtering, according to Broadbent’s model?
        Whether the message was coming from your right or your left side
        The pitch of the voice reading the message
        The loudness of the voice reading the message
        The language that the message was being read in (Correct)
    Question 7: Cognitive psychologists use all of the following as criteria for determining whether an activity is automatic EXCEPT:
        Whether it occurs intentionally
        Whether it gives rise to conscious awareness
        Whether it interferes with other activities
        Whether it requires mental filtering (Correct)
    Question 8: Certain stimuli seem to jump off the page at the viewer, causing an involuntary shift of attention that is referred to as:
        The Stroop effect
        Attentional capture (Correct)
        Attenuation
        The cocktail party effect
    Question 9: Stroop interference lessens when:
        Participants are better readers.
        Participants are given more practice at naming colours. (Correct)
        Participants are girls rather than boys.
        Participants are encouraged to focus carefully.
    Question 10: Research on divided attention suggests that:
        Some people can multitask without any drop in performance.
        There are no limits on the number of things that we can successfully do at once.
        As individual tasks becomes more demanding, multitasking becomes more efficient.
        If you think that you are doing two things simultaneously, you are probably really switching attention back and forth between the two. (Correct)

Week 4: Memory Structures
4

    Question 1: Which of the following is NOT a component of Baddeley’s working memory model?
        The phonological loop
        The icon (Correct)
        The central executive
        The visuospatial sketchpad
    Question 2: Sternberg’s classic work on searching for information from short-term memory indicated that the search process is:
        Serial
        Self - terminating
        Parallel
        Both serial and exhaustive (Correct)
    Question 3: In the absence of rehearsal, short-term memory tends to:
        Last about 20 seconds (Correct)
        Last about 8 seconds
        Decay slowly over 24 hours
        Decay slowly over a week
    Question 4: The suffix effect relates to which type of memory?
        Iconic
        Echoic (Correct)
        Short term
        Working
    Question 5: Unattended information is stored briefly in:
        Sensory memory (Correct)
        Short term memory
        Long term memory
        Working memory
    Question 6: Retrieval involves:
        The activation of the senses
        The translation of information into a form that can be stored
        The storage of information over time
        The calling to mind of previously stored information (Correct)
    Question 7: The primacy and recency effects in memory:
        Are thought to be due to the action of short-term memory
        Are thought to be due to the action of long-term memory
        Are thought to be due to the action of sensory memory
        Can be independently manipulated, indicating at least two types of memory at work (Correct)
    Question 8: Information in short-term memory is assumed to be coded primarily by:
        Sound (Correct)
        Meaning
        Visual appearance
        Both sound and meaning
    Question 9: Repeating a phone number to yourself to hold it in memory while you dial it would use which component of working memory?
        The visuospatial sketchpad
        The phonological loop (Correct)
        The episodic buffer
        Both the visuospatial sketchpad and the phonological loop
    Question 10: Disrupting the process of long-term potentiation leads to:
        Disruption of learning and remembering (Correct)
        Recovery from anterograde amnesia
        Recovery from retrograde amnesia
        Language deficits

Week 5: Long Term Memory
5

    Question 1: As classically conceived, long-term memory is held to have all of the following properties EXCEPT:
        It comprises a permanent or at least semipermanent store
        It has virtually unlimited capacity
        It primarily uses acoustic coding (Correct)
        Information stored within it is not always easily accessible
    Question 2: Psychologists believe that the capacity of long-term memory is:
        unlimited (Correct)
        7 + 2 items
        18 items
        5000 items
    Question 3: Which of the following are most likely to be confused in long-term memory?
        The letters P and R
        The letters C and B
        The words “see” and “bee”
        The words “big” and “large” (Correct)
    Question 4: The code in long-term memory is based on:
        Sound
        Visual imagery
        Meaning (Correct)
        Both sound and visual imagery
    Question 5: Your memory for how to ride a bicycle is an example of ______ memory.
        Explicit
        Implicit
        Declarative
        Procedural (Correct)
    Question 6: A retrieval cue will be most effective when it is highly distinctive or unusual, according to the principle of:
        Cue overload (Correct)
        Encoding specificity
        Mood dependence
        State dependence
    Question 7: Context effects and state-dependent learning effects occur:
        For recall tests only (Correct)
        For recognition tests only
        For both recall and recognition
        For paired associate tests only
    Question 8: Bahrick’s study of retention of Spanish vocabulary words showed that large portions of information remained in long-term memory for:
        Several months
        1-2 years
        Up to 5 years
        Over 50 years (Correct)
    Question 9: Techniques designed to improve memory, often involving the use of visual imagery, are called:
        Mnemonics (Correct)
        Eidetic
        Iconic
        IQ enhancers
    Question 10: Your memory of your first college lecture would be an example of:
        Semantic memory
        Episodic memory (Correct)
        Implicit memory
        Working memory

Week 6: Semantic Memory
6

    Question 1: According to the notion of cognitive economy, a characteristic like “has wings” would be stored along with:
        Bird (Correct)
        Ostrich
        Hummingbird
        All of the above
    Question 2: Priming in lexical decision tasks may be explained by the idea of:
        Episodic memory
        Encoding specificity
        Spreading activation (Correct)
        Typicality effects
    Question 3: Which of the following is a good example of a superordinate level of categorization?
        Fruit (Correct)
        Banana
        Fuji apple
        Golden delicious apple
    Question 4: The schema view of concept formation assumes that:
        There are clear boundaries among individual schemata
        There is cognitive economy among concepts
        Information is abstracted across instances (Correct)
        No information is stored about actual instances
    Question 5: According to research by Collins and Quillian, the statement “Siamese cats have blue eyes” will be verified:
        Slower than “Siamese cats give birth to live young” (Correct)
        Faster than “Siamese cats give birth to live young”
        In the same amount of time as “Siamese cats give birth to live young”
        Slower than “Siamese cats have tails”
    Question 6: Conrad has found evidence that reaction time is best predicted by:
        Cognitive economy
        Frequency of associations (Correct)
        Encoding specificity
        Episodic memory
    Question 7: Which of the following would be a part of your declarative memory system?
        Knowing how to ride a bicycle
        Knowing how to drive a car
        Knowing how to react a red light
        Being able to name a hybrid car (Correct)
    Question 8: Collins and Loftus’s spreading activation theory differs from the hierarchical network theory in that:
        It dispenses with the idea of cognitive economy (Correct)
        It relies on the assumption of hierarchical structure
        It cannot account for the typicality effect
        It makes stronger predictions than hierarchical models
    Question 9: “Characteristic features” and “family resemblance” are important aspects of the _________ view of concepts.
        Classical
        Prototype (Correct)
        Exemplar
        Schema
    Question 10: Studies of semantic memory show people are faster at responding to “bread” if it is paired with:
        “rencle”
        “dog”
        “island”
        “butter” (Correct)

Week 7: Concepts and Categorization
7

    Question 1: People categorize new instances by comparing them to representations of previously stored instances according to the ______ view.
        Classical
        Prototype
        Exemplar (Correct)
        Schema
    Question 2: According to the typicality effect, “A dog is a household pet” should be verified:
        Faster than “a poodle is a household pet”
        Faster than “a dog is a living thing”
        Faster than “a ferret is a household pet” (Correct)
        Faster than “a dog is an animal”
    Question 3: Which of the following is a “natural kind” concept?
        Blue
        Wolf (Correct)
        Odd number
        Mirror
    Question 4: A schema for a routine event, such as going to the dentist, is called a:
        Concept
        Script (Correct)
        Exemplar
        Category
    Question 5: A ________ is a mental representation of some object, event, or pattern.
        Category
        Concept (Correct)
        Script
        Memory
    Question 6: A ______ can be defined as a class of similar things that share an essential core or perceptual/biological properties.
        Category (Correct)
        Concept
        Script
        Schema
    Question 7: Which of the following is NOT TRUE of the classical view of concepts?
        It proposes concepts are represented by list of features.
        It assumes category membership is clear-cut.
        It accurately predicts the typicality effect. (Correct)
        ‘Necessity’ and ‘sufficient’ features are important.
    Question 8: Which of the following is a good example of a basic level of categorization?
        Musical instrument
        Piano (Correct)
        Electronic keyboard
        String instrument
    Question 9: If “soda” is a basic-level category, then ______ would be a subordinate level.
        Soft drink
        Beverage
        Drink
        Coca-Cola (Correct)
    Question 10: The ______ view argues categorization depends on theories about how the world works.
        Classical
        Prototype
        Knowledge based (Correct)
        Schema

Week 8: Visual Imagery and Spatial Cognition
8

    Question 1: Participants doing mental imagery tasks tend to show brain activity in the:
        Temporal lobe
        Parietal lobe
        Frontal lobe
        Occipital lobe (Correct)
    Question 2: How people represent and navigate in and through space is a question of:
        Navigational cognition
        Representational cognition
        Spatial cognition (Correct)
        Visual cognition
    Question 3: Images can prime the visual pathway, making it easier to detect a faint stimulus. This is:
        Perceptual equivalence (Correct)
        Spatial equivalence
        Structural equivalence
        Transformational equivalence
    Question 4: Which question would take you the LONGEST TIME to answer?
        Which is faster, a turtle or a sports car?
        Which is faster, a turtle or a cheetah?
        Which is faster, a turtle or a caterpillar? (Correct)
        Which is faster, a caterpillar or a cat?
    Question 5: The relational-organizational hypothesis is supported by:
        The effectiveness of the method of loci
        The fact that concrete words are recalled better than abstract words
        The fact that non-interactive images do not facilitate recall whereas interactive images do (Correct)
        The effectiveness of the pegword method
    Question 6: Long-term memory contains two separate systems for verbal and visual forms according to Paivio’s ______ hypothesis.
        Picture-word
        Dual code (Correct)
        Visuo-verbal
        Relational-Organizational
    Question 7: Which method would most help you remember the word pair “elephant-cigar”?
        Repeating “elephant” while visualizing a cigar
        Visualizing an elephant smoking a cigar (Correct)
        Repeating both words over and over
        Visualizing an elephant and a cigar not touching
    Question 8: Your mental map of your campus is probably:
        Larger than reality
        Smaller than reality
        More regular, with more straight lines and right angles, than reality (Correct)
        Less regular than reality
    Question 9: Retrieval of information that was not intentionally stored is possible through:
        Perceptual equivalence
        Transformational equivalence
        Implicit encoding (Correct)
        Structural encoding
    Question 10: A propositional representation is thought to be ______ in nature.
        Verbal
        Visual
        Both verbal and visual
        Neither verbal nor visual (Correct)

Week 9: Language
9

    Question 1: Agreed criteria for claiming communication is a language include:
        Regularity
        Productivity
        Referentiality
        Both regularity and productivity (Correct)
    Question 2: Language being able to express infinite combinations of ideas means it is:
        Regular
        Interpersonal
        Productive (Correct)
        Referential
    Question 3: A fundamental problem of speech perception is that:
        Speech is discrete rather than continuous
        A single phoneme sounds different depending on its context (Correct)
        Hearing is less accurate than vision
        Missing phonemes render words incomprehensible
    Question 4: The branch of linguistics devoted to the study of meaning:
        Phonetics
        Semantics (Correct)
        Morphology
        Pragmatics
    Question 5: Did she say “many” or “men knee”? This type of ambiguity is:
        Phonetic (Correct)
        Lexical
        Syntactic
        Semantic
    Question 6: Underlying knowledge that allows language production and comprehension is:
        Linguistic performance
        Linguistic competence (Correct)
        Linguistic production
        Grammatical behaviour
    Question 7: The study of sound combinations in a language is:
        Phonology (Correct)
        Morphology
        Syntax
        Grammar
    Question 8: We notice ambiguities in sentences:
        All the time
        In “garden path” sentences (Correct)
        When they are humorous
        When they make no sense
    Question 9: Which set of sentences takes the longest to read and comprehend?
        We took the dog to the vet. The dog was nervous.
        Sara drove the car to the market. The car ran out of gas.
        She wrapped the Christmas presents. The sweater needed a larger box. (Correct)
        We got some beer out of the car. The beer was warm.
    Question 10: Utterances that are actions, like “You’re fired!”, are:
        Declaration (Correct)
        Directive
        Commissive
        Expressive

Week 10: Thinking, Problem Solving and Reasoning
10

    Question 1: _____ is defined as “going beyond the information given.”
        Problem solving
        Thinking (Correct)
        Decision making
        Remembering
    Question 2: Which of the following is an example of an ill-defined problem?
        Putting together your schedule of classes for next semester (Correct)
        Constructing a proof in geometry
        Solving an algebra problem
        Solving the Tower of Hanoi problem
    Question 3: Comparing the goal with the starting point and choosing ways to overcome the distance is:
        Generate and test
        Means end analysis (Correct)
        Reasoning by analogy
        Mental set
    Question 4: Mental set:
        Can only be induced by large amount of practice
        Can lead us to make unwarranted assumption about a problem (Correct)
        Involves the use of analogy to solve a problem
        Aids problem solving supply an efficient representation
    Question 5: Recalling an old solution to solve a new, similarly structured problem is reasoning by:
        Introspection
        Analysis
        Analogy (Correct)
        Backtracking
    Question 6: A very important technique for solving the Towers of Hanoi problem is:
        Means-end analysis
        Generate-and-test
        Working backward (Correct)
        Trial and error
    Question 7: Which of the following is the best example of a well-defined problem?
        Creating a guest list for a party
        Finding a detour around a traffic problem
        Constructing a proof in algebra (Correct)
        Writing a paper for your cognition class
    Question 8: Psychologists focus on well-defined problems because:
        They are easy to present (Correct)
        They often take weeks or months to solve
        They can be complicated to score
        They accurately mirror real world problems
    Question 9: Adoption of a rigid mental set toward an object is called:
        Well-defined thinking
        Ill-defined thinking
        Functional fixedness (Correct)
        Object set
    Question 10: The General Problem Solver (GPS) uses:
        Means end analysis (Correct)
        Generate-and-test
        Reasoning by analogy
        Introspection

Week 11: Reasoning and Decision Making
11

    Question 1: Deductive reasoning involves:
        Going from general to specific statements (Correct)
        Conclusions that add new information
        Going from specific to general
        Going from specific to specific
    Question 2: If a person has five letters in his/her name, s/he is a Glirple. I can validly assume:
        Shawn is a Glirple
        Shawn is a Glirple, and anyone who is not a Glirple cannot be name Susan (Correct)
        Anyone who is a Glirple must have five letters
        Anyone who is not a Glirple cannot be name Susan
    Question 3: Judging probability by the ease with which examples come to mind is the heuristic of:
        Representativeness
        Availability (Correct)
        Framing
        Hindsight
    Question 4: Which reasoning results in conclusions containing new information?
        Inductive reasoning (Correct)
        Deductive reasoning
        Invalid reasoning
        Both inductive and deductive
    Question 5: Deductive reasoning where true premises ensure a true conclusion has:
        Inductive strength
        Deductive strength
        Inductive validity
        Deductive validity (Correct)
    Question 6: Reasoning that Fred cannot be a Glirple because he doesn't have five letters is:
        Modus ponens
        Modus tollens
        Denying the antecedent (Correct)
        Affirming the consequent
    Question 7: In Wason’s four-card task with everyday contexts (Coke/beer):
        People still neglect modus tollens
        People turn over all four cards
        People turn over only one card
        About 75% participants solve it correctly (Correct)
    Question 8: If some Joneses are tall and some tall people play basketball:
        Logically, some Joneses play basketball
        Logically, no Joneses play basketball
        Most people assume some Joneses play basketball (Correct)
        Most people assume all Joneses play basketball
    Question 9: Analogy ease depends on all EXCEPT:
        Difficulty of terms
        Knowledge of terms
        Difficulty of finding relationships
        Reasoner’s training in formal reasoning procedures (Correct)
    Question 10: A difference between everyday and formal reasoning is:
        In everyday reasoning, all premises are supplied
        In everyday reasoning, there is typically one correct answer
        Everyday reasoning problems are solved as a means to other goals (Correct)
        Formal reasoning problems are not self-contained

Week 12: Making Decisions
12

    Question 1: The gambler’s fallacy is a special instance of:
        framing
        availability
        belief in the law of small numbers (Correct)
        hindsight
    Question 2: Struggling with a problem because you already invested time is:
        the sunk cost effect (Correct)
        a framing effect
        the anchor effect
        availability bias
    Question 3: Normative models of decision making describe:
        how we ought to make decisions in realistic circumstances
        ideal performance under ideal circumstances (Correct)
        what people actually do
        cognitive illusions
    Question 4: Past events seem “inevitable” due to:
        framing effect
        hindsight bias (Correct)
        gambler’s fallacy
        availability heuristic
    Question 5: Judging Anita as a model because she resembles a stereotype uses:
        representativeness (Correct)
        availability
        framing
        the law of small numbers
    Question 6: Mental activities in choosing among alternatives are:
        problem solving
        inductive reasoning
        deductive reasoning
        decision making (Correct)
    Question 7: The tendency to seek out information supporting current beliefs is:
        believability effect
        content effect
        confirmation bias (Correct)
        syllogistic reasoning
    Question 8: Which is NOT one of Galotti's five phases of decision making?
        Goal setting
        Information gathering
        Planning
        Random choice (Correct)
    Question 9: Decision making falls short of optimality because:
        There is not enough information
        One cannot be rational under uncertainty
        The information available overwhelms cognitive processes (Correct)
        Rationality assumes higher intelligence
    Question 10: The phase of finding a way to organize information is:
        Goal setting
        Planning
        Structuring the decision (Correct)
        Evaluating